# Detecting Annotations

We've already learned what annotations are and when they are used. Do you remember any of them? The most used ones in the Java library are `@Deprecated` and `@Override`, but there are many other annotations in third-party libraries. For example, the Spring library has lots of them, and there's a useful `@Test` annotation for testing Java classes. You can quickly go through [this page's code examples] just to see how often they might be used in practice. Now let's find out how they actually work and what magic happens when they are present.

## 1. `getDeclaredAnnotations` method

Actually, annotations are just markers: they indicate that some class, method, or field has special properties. These annotations are further analyzed with the help of reflection when compiling or running the program.

Let's look at the following class:
```java
class Item {
    @Deprecated
    public static final int maxItems = 100;
    public static int inStock = 19;

    private String name;
    protected int basePrice;

    public Item(String name, int basePrice) {
        this.name = name;
        this.basePrice = basePrice;
    }

    public String getName() {
        return name;
    }

    public int getPrice() {
        return (int) (basePrice * getMarkUp());
    }

    public boolean haveSuchAmount(@Deprecated int amount) {
        return inStock >= amount;
    }

    @Deprecated
    protected double getMarkUp() {
        double markUp = 0.1;
        // ... connecting to the remote server
        return 1 + markUp;
    }

    @Override
    public String toString() {
        return getName() + " " + getPrice();
    }
}
```
It has three `@Deprecated` annotations and one `@Override` annotation. Let's try to analyze them by using reflection.

For working with annotations, `Class`, `Method`, `Field` and `Constructor` classes have the `getDeclaredAnnotations()` method, that returns an array of `Annotation` objects. This method returns an array, not an object because multiple annotations can be applied to a single field or method. If you follow the link above, the first example there will contain a huge pile of six annotations before the class!

The `Annotation` class provides a useful method called `annotationType` that returns a `Class` object representing the annotation. It can be useful if you need to access all elements of the annotation or just get its name.

## 2. Code example

Let’s execute the following code. Here we go through all the names of methods and fields of our `ItemClass` and apply the `getDeclaredAnnotations()` method to get their annotations and print them next to the respective names:
```java
Class itemClass = Item.class;

for (Field field : itemClass.getDeclaredFields()) {
    for (Annotation annotation : field.getDeclaredAnnotations()) {
        System.out.print(annotation + " - ");
    }
    System.out.println(field.getName());
}

for (Method method : itemClass.getDeclaredMethods()) {
    for (Annotation annotation : method.getDeclaredAnnotations()) {
        System.out.print(annotation + " - ");
    }
    System.out.println(method.getName());
}
```

Take a look at the output:
```
@java.lang.Deprecated(forRemoval=false, since="") - maxItems
inStock
name
basePrice
toString
getName
@java.lang.Deprecated(forRemoval=false, since="") - getMarkUp
getPrice
haveSuchAmount
```

You can see that though we had three instances of annotations in our class, we manage to output only two of them. `@Deprecated` appeared in line with `maxItems` field and `getMarkUp` method as we might have expected. However, for some reason, there is no `@Override toString` line in here. Let’s try to find out why by ourselves and this way learn more about annotations and reflection. We may suppose that the absence of @Override has to do with its method: actually, `toString` is not declared in this class, but in the `Object`. To check our hypotheses let’s use another method for getting class methods `getMethods`. As you probably remember, it returns all public methods of the class, including the inherited ones.
```java
for (Method method : itemClass.getMethods()) {
    for (Annotation annotation : method.getDeclaredAnnotations()) {
        System.out.print(annotation + " - ");
    }
    System.out.println(method.getName());
}
```

If our suggestion is correct, this time we will get the `@Override` annotation for `toString` method. But look what we get by the above snippet:
```
toString
getName
getPrice
haveSuchAmount
wait
wait
wait
equals
@jdk.internal.HotSpotIntrinsicCandidate() - hashCode
@jdk.internal.HotSpotIntrinsicCandidate() - getClass
@jdk.internal.HotSpotIntrinsicCandidate() - notify
@jdk.internal.HotSpotIntrinsicCandidate() - notifyAll
```

Still, something is not right! As you see, we now got four methods with unfamiliar annotations, and the `toString` method still has no annotation. Let’s not focus on the ones containing the words *jdk* and *internal*, we have no intention to go there for now and just reproduce them for the sake of credibility. Note that this time we didn’t get `getMarkUp` method at all since it is *protected*.

Hence we may conclude that the reason lies in the nature of the annotation itself. Indeed, `@Override` annotation is a compile-time annotation and is not present when the program is running. While `@Deprecated` is present during the execution of the program, which means that it is a runtime annotation.

## 3. Conclusion

Reflection package provides functionality to retrieve annotations from the source code. `Class`, `Field` and `Method` classes have the `getDeclaredAnnotations` method, which returns a list of configured runtime annotations. Other annotations are not available at runtime because the compiler erases them.
