# Streams of Primitives

The generic `Stream<T>` class is used to process objects which are always represented by reference types. For example, to work with integers, it's possible to create `Stream<Integer>` that wraps primitive `int`'s into the `Integer` class. But this is not an efficient way to work with integers, since it needs additional wrapper objects. Fortunately, there are three primitive specialized types called `IntStream`, `LongStream`, and `DoubleStream` which can effectively process primitive values without extra boxing.

> There is no `CharStream`, `ByteStream`, `ShortStream`, `FloatStream` and `BooleanStream`.

## 1. Creating primitive type streams

There are lots of ways to create primitive type streams. Some of the ways are suitable for all streams while others are not.

- Passing elements in the `of` method:
```java
IntStream ints = IntStream.of(1, 2, 3);
LongStream longs = LongStream.of(1, 2, 3);
DoubleStream doubles = DoubleStream.of(12.2, 18.1);
```

This looks quite similar to collections. It is also possible to create an empty stream invoking `IntStream.of()` or `IntStream.empty()`.

- From an array of primitives:
```java
IntStream numbers = Arrays.stream(new int[]{1, 2, 3});
```

This way works for all types of primitive specialized streams. It is also possible to specify `start` (inclusive) and `end` (exclusive) positions to create a stream only from a subarray.

- For `IntStream` and `LongStream` it's possible to invoke `range()` and `rangeClosed()` to create streams from ranges.

```java
IntStream numbers = IntStream.range(10, 15); // from 10 (incl) to 15 (excl)
LongStream longs = LongStream.rangeClosed(1_000_000, 2_000_000); // it includes both borders
```

The difference is the method `rangeClosed` includes its upper bound while `range` does not.

- Getting `IntStream` from a string:
```java
IntStream stream = "aibohphobia".chars(); // It returns IntStream!
```

This only works for `IntStream` since characters can be represented as `int`'s.

Other ways to create primitive type streams are the same as for generic streams: `generate`, `iterate`, `concat` and so on. Here is an example of generating `DoubleStream` with ten random numbers and printing them:
```java
DoubleStream.generate(Math::random)
        .limit(10)
        .forEach(System.out::println);
```

Now let's look at some operations with primitive streams.

## 2. Additional operations

The primitive streams have all the same methods as generic streams, but their methods accept primitive specialized functions as arguments. For example the `forEach` method of `IntStream` takes `IntConsumer`, but not `Consumer<Integer>`. Fortunately, this does not affect the possibilities of the streams.

There are a few additional aggregating operations such as `min`, `max`, `average` and `sum`. The first three return an optional object which represents a result or nothing since the initial stream can be empty.

> Note, actually `Stream<T>` also provides `min` and `max` but its methods need a comparator as the argument.

The following code demonstrates the methods:
```java
int[] numbers = { 10, 11, 25, 14, 22, 21, 18 };

int max = IntStream.of(numbers).max().getAsInt();
System.out.println(max); // 25

int min = IntStream.of(numbers).min().getAsInt();
System.out.println(min); // 10

double avg = IntStream.of(numbers).average().orElse(0.0);
System.out.println(avg); // 17.2857...

int sum = IntStream.of(numbers).sum();
System.out.println(sum); // 121
```

It is also possible to calculate these aggregates at once using a single invocation of the `summaryStatistics` method.
```java
IntSummaryStatistics stat = IntStream.rangeClosed(1, 55_555).summaryStatistics();

System.out.println(String.format("Count: %d, Min: %d, Max: %d, Avg: %.1f",
        stat.getCount(), stat.getMin(), stat.getMax(), stat.getAverage()));
```

Here are the results:
```
Count: 55555, Min: 1, Max: 55555, Avg: 27778.0
```

Wow! And no loops here.

## 3. Transforming streams

You can perform various transformations of primitive type streams.

- **Transforming a primitive type stream to another one** using `asDoubleStream()` for `IntStream` and `LongStream`, or `asLongStream()` for `IntStream` only.

Here is an example which converts a stream of integers into a stream of doubles:
```java
IntStream.of(1, 2, 3, 4)
        .asDoubleStream()
        .forEach(System.out::println); // it prints doubles 1.0, 2.0, ...
```

- **Transforming a primitive type stream into the generalized stream** using the `boxed()` method (i.e., `IntStream` → `Stream<Integer>`). All the primitive type streams have this.
```java
Stream<Integer> streamOfNumbers = IntStream.range(1, 10).boxed();
```

- **Transforming a generalized stream into a stream of primitives** can be done invoking one of `mapToInt()`, `mapToLong()` or `mapToDouble()` methods with the `i -> i` lambda expression as the argument:
```java
List<Integer> numbers = List.of(1, 5, 9);
int sum = numbers.stream().mapToInt(i -> i).sum(); // 15
```
This can be especially useful when you want to invoke one of the specific primitive stream's methods.

## 4. Summary

We've considered three primitive specialized streams which are similar to the generalized stream but have some features:

- their methods take primitive specialized functions as arguments;
- they have additional methods such as `range`, `sum`, `average`, `summaryStatistics` and some others;
- they have the performance benefits since there is no need to perform boxing/unboxing operations;
- they can be converted in the generalized stream and vice versa.
