# Iterator and Iterable

As you know, there is a *for-each* loop and the `forEach` method to iterate over elements of a collection. Both of them provide a simple and unified way to process different types of collections. In this topic, you will learn more about why they work and how to use them.

## 1. Being iterable

The *Java Standard Library* has a special interface called `Iterable`. Implementing this interface allows objects of a class to be targets of the *for-each* loop. If you think that the `Collection` interface extends this to be **iterable**, you are absolutely right.
```java
public interface Collection<E> extends Iterable<E> { /* methods */ } 
```

> The `Collection` interface extends `Iterable`, but `Map` does not.


Due to this, any collection class (`List`, `Queue`, `Set`) can be considered as Iterable.

```java
Iterable<String> iterable = List.of("first", "second", "third");
```

The order of elements when iterating is specific to a chosen collection. For lists, the order is the same as the order of its elements.
```java
List<String> strings = List.of("first", "second", "third");

// the loop prints "first", "second", and then "third"
for (String elem : strings) {
    System.out.println(elem);
}
```
The same is true for the `forEach` method that can take the reference to a method:
```java
// the loop prints "first", "second", and then "third"
strings.forEach(System.out::println);
```

For sets, the situation is different, since ordinary sets are not ordered. As an experiment, you can replace the list with the following set:
```java
Set<String> strings = Set.of("first", "second", "third");
```
The result may be different each time the program starts.

The `Iterable` interface provides three generic methods. In this topic, we will consider two of them:

- `Iterator<T> iterator()` returns a special object which can iterate over the collection;
- `void forEach(Consumer<T> action)` takes an action and executes it on each element of the collection, it can be used together with lambda expressions and method references.

All collections that inherit the `Collection` interface have these methods.

## 2. Using iterators

The `Iterator<T>` is a universal mechanism for iterating over collections regardless of their structure. It takes elements in the order provided by the collection. In some sense, it is like a moveable "pointer" to an element of the collection.

> The **iterator** allows you to remove elements from the underlying collection but you cannot do it using a *for-each* loop.

Some methods of the `Iterator<E>` interface:

- `boolean hasNext()` returns `true` if the iteration has more elements, and `false` otherwise;
- `E next()` returns the next element in the iteration;
- `void remove()` removes the last element returned by this iterator from the collection.

The *for-each* loop uses the first two methods under the hood.

It is also possible to directly access and use an iterator of a collection. The typical usage includes three steps:

1. Check the collection has next element.
2. Obtain the next element.
3. Process the obtained element.

For example, let's remove all elements less than 10 from a sorted set.
```java
Set<Long> set = new TreeSet<>(); // sorted set
set.add(10L);
set.add(5L);
set.add(18L);
set.add(14L);
set.add(9L);

System.out.println(set); // [5, 9, 10, 14, 18]

Iterator<Long> iter = set.iterator();
while (iter.hasNext()) {
    Long current = iter.next();
    if (current < 10L) {
        iter.remove();
    }
}

System.out.println(set); // [10, 14, 18]
```

In this example, the **iterator** gets elements according to the sorting order and successfully removes some of them.

## 3. An iterator for lists

There is a special iterator for lists called `ListIterator` which extends the common `Iterator` interface. It allows the programmer to traverse the list in either direction, modify the list during iteration, and obtain the current position in the list.

In addition to standard `Iterator`'s methods, this iterator provides the following methods:

- `int nextIndex()` returns the index of the element that would be returned by invoking `next`;
- `boolean hasPrevious()` returns `true` if the list has more previous elements;
- `E previous()` returns the previous element in the list and moves the cursor position backwards;
- `int previousIndex()` returns the index of the element that would be returned by invoking `previous`;
- `void set(E element)` replaces the last element returned by `next` or `previous` with the specified element;
- `void add(E element)` inserts the specified element into the list immediately before the element that would be returned by `next`, and after the element that would be returned by `previous`.

Here is an example of how it works:
```java
List<Integer> list = List.of(1, 2, 3, 4);
ListIterator<Integer> iterator = list.listIterator(); // only for lists!

// go to the last element
while (iterator.hasNext()) { iterator.next(); }

// print elements in the backward order with their indexes
while (iterator.hasPrevious()) {
    int previousIndex = iterator.previousIndex();
    int element = iterator.previous();
    System.out.println(element + " on " + previousIndex);
}
```
This code prints numbers in the backward order with their indexes.
```
4 on 3
3 on 2
2 on 1
1 on 0
```

> If you invoke `previous` before `previousIndex` the result will differ since `previous` changes the state of the iterator: the current position.

This concludes our consideration of iterators.

## 4. To sum up

Implementing `Iterable` interface allows objects of a class to be targets of the for-each loop and more than that. This interface provides `iterator` and `forEach` methods, which are inherited by all collections of the `Collection` interface.

The `iterator` method returns an `Iterator<T>` object, which implements an interface for iterating over collections regardless of their structure. It takes elements in the order provided by the collection and has `hasNext`, `next`, and `remove` methods. The first two are actually used by a *for-each* loop, which does not allow removing elements.

A `ListIterator` is a special iterator for lists that extends the `Iterator` interface. It has additional methods that allow traversing the list in either direction, modify the list during iteration, and obtain the current position.
