# Command-line arguments

As you already know, the `main` method is an entry point of every Java program.
```java
public static void main(String[] args) {}
```

As it works as a usual method, it can receive some parameters via the `String[] args` part. But as it is the main method of the program, you can think of them as the whole program's arguments, so-called **command-line arguments**.

So, here we will look closer at how these arguments are used.

## 1. Different numbers of parameters + passing example

There are different ways of providing command-line args to a program. For example, you can define them with your IDE tools or write them manually as a program run command parameters:

```
java Main myArg
```

We can pass a different number of parameters separating them with space and get the values in `main(...)` as array members:
```java
public class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        System.out.println(args[0]);
        System.out.println(args[1]);
    }
}
```

Now if we compile the `Main` class from its directory with
```
javac Main.java 
```

and then call it with two arguments we will get the expected output:
```
java Main myFirstArg mySecondArg
myFirstArg
mySecondArg
```

If we want to pass an argument that consists of multiple "words" separated by blank space, we must put such an argument in double quotes:
```
java Main myFirstArg "multiple word arg"
myFirstArg
multiple word arg
```

We don't have to pass any arguments, but the program will fail while trying to get the argument that was not provided:
```
java Main
Exception in thread "main" java.lang.ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException: 0
        at Main.main(Main.java:5)
```

## 2. Argument types

The command-line arguments are always provided as an array of `Strings`. You can still pass number values, but they will be accepted as `Strings`. Casting to a number or whatever type you expect it to be should be done manually in the program:
```java
public class Main {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        int i = Integer.parseInt(args[0]);
        System.out.println("Provided number : " + i);
    }
}
```

> We are using standard output tools here to simplify the example. It is not the common way of logging/showing error information in real applications.

Now we need to recompile the class with `javac`.

Then, if we test it with a correct integer value, it looks like:
```
java Main 5
Provided number : 5
```

## 3. With or without arguments?

What will happen, if there are two different `main` methods: with and without args?
```java
public class Main {
    
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        System.out.println("Method with arguments called!");
        System.out.println(args[0]);
    }

    public static void main() {
        System.out.println("No arguments method called!");
    }
    
}
```

If you recompile and try to call the program with empty arguments list and then with any argument, the first method will be called both times.

> It means, that in Java the `main` method always has to accept arguments, but you don't have to always provide them.

So, if your program requires no arguments, its `main` method still has to have `String[] args` as parameter. Java programmers are not allowed to change the type of `args` array as well: it has to be `String[]`.

## 4. Summary

Now you know more about the command-line arguments in Java. You can pass them to your program as `Strings` and handle them in the `main` method to make your application more flexible and configurable.
