# Math library

To efficiently perform various basic (and not so basic) numeric operations, including exponential, modulus or finding the maximum or minimum of two numbers, Java provides the standard class `Math`.

## 1. Basic and rounding methods

There are a number of popular methods for rounding numbers up and down and performing other basic operations. Let's take a look at some of them:

- **Math.min(..., ...)** returns the smaller value of two arguments;
- **Math.max(..., ...)** returns the greater value of two arguments;

```java
int min = Math.min(11, 81); // min is 11
int max = Math.max(20, 30); // max is 30
```

- **Math.abs(...)** returns the absolute value of its argument;

```java
int abs = Math.abs(-10); // abs is 10
double dabs = Math.abs(-10.33); // dabs is 10.33
```

- **Math.floor(...)** returns the largest double value that is less than or equal to its argument and is equal to an integer;
- **Math.ceil(...)** returns the smallest double value that is greater than or equal to its argument and is equal to an integer.

```java
double floor = Math.floor(3.78); // floor is 3.0
double ceil = Math.ceil(4.15); // ceil is 5.0
```

## 2. Exponential functions

When we need to calculate a square or a cube root of a given number, we can apply the following methods:

- **Math.sqrt(...)** returns the square root of its argument;
- **Math.cbrt(...)** returns the cube root of its argument;

```java
double sqrt = Math.sqrt(2); // sqrt is 1.4142...
double cbrt = Math.cbrt(27.0); // cbrt is 3.0
```

It is also possible to raise a number to any power we would like:

- **Math.pow(..., ...)** returns the value of the first argument raised to the power of the second argument.

```java
double square = Math.pow(5, 2); // the square of 5 is 25.0
double cube = Math.pow(2, 3); // the cube of 2 is 8.0
```

## 3. Trigonometric functions

And here are some of the trigonometric functions, provided by `Math`:

- **Math.sin(...)** returns the trigonometric sine of the given angle in radians;
- **Math.cos(...)** returns the trigonometric cosine of the given angle in radians;

```java
double sin = Math.sin(pi / 2); // sin90°  is 1.0
double cos = Math.cos(pi); // cos180° is -1.0
```

- **Math.toRadians(...)** converts an angle measured in degrees to an angle measured in radians (approximately).

```java
double grad = Math.toRadians(30); // grad is 0.5235...
```

## 4. And there's more

There are also methods for hyperbolic, logarithmic, angular, and other functions. Check them out here and use when needed. Among them, you'll find such a useful method as:

- **Math.random()** returns a double value with a positive sign, greater than or equal to 0.0 and less than 1.0.

```java
double random = Math.random(); // a random value >= 0.0 and < 1.0
```

Apart from functions, the Java `Math` class contains two common **constants**:


- **Math.PI** is the ratio of the circumference of a circle to its diameter;
- **Math.E** is the base of the natural logarithm.

```java
double pi = Math.PI; // pi is 3.1415...
double e = Math.E; // e is 2.71828...
```

## 5. The length of the hypotenuse

Now let's take a look at an example. Assume that we have a right triangle (one angle is 90 degrees). We know the lengths of both sides: a = 3 and b = 4. Our task is to calculate the length of the hypotenuse. Now, it is time to go through the list of the Math class functions. After finding the one we need, the only thing left is to write the following code:

```java
double a = 3, b = 4;
double c = Math.hypot(a, b); // c is 5.0
```

As you can see, the `Math` class has a lot of methods for performing numeric calculations and using them will make your life easier and your code nicer.


