# Reification

Generics are known for their type safety, which is obviously a good thing. However, it has a flip side. As we've already discussed, type erasure — the compiler process that preserves type safety — can complicate program logic. Now it's time to discuss another generics-related notion: reification.

## 1. What is reification

Type erasure only affects certain data types — other types are not affected and preserve their type data in byte code. Types that save information about themselves during type erasure are called *reifiable*, while types whose information is erased are called *non-reifiable*. The term reification refers to the process of making certain type parameters available at runtime as well as at compile-time.

## 2. The two groups

Let's recall what types are replaced during type erasure and can be called non-reifiable. Non-reifiable types include:

- parameterized types like `<T>`, which are replaced by `Object`.

- bounded generics or wildcards. For example, `<T extends Number>` and `<? extends Number>` are replaced by `Number`.

Reifiable types are more extensive. They include:

- primitive types like `int` and `double`.

- non-parameterized types such as `String`, `Number` and other non-generic classes.

- more complicated reifiable types, which are technically equivalent to `Object`. The first is a *raw* type. It is a type that can be parameterized but is not. For instance, if class `Box<T>` is declared as `Box box = new Box()` then it's a raw type. The second is an unbounded wildcard type, for example, `Box<?>`. It includes arrays whose component type is reifiable as well.

## 3. Non-reifiable limitations

The fact that non-reifiable types are not present at runtime leads to some limitations:

1) It is prohibited to create an instance of a non-reifiable type.

Suppose you need to create an instance of a class of `T` type inside a parameterized class. It looks fine to call a generic constructor, however, it leads to a compilation error
```java
class Box<T> {
    private T instance;

    public void init() {
        instance = new T(); // compile-time error: Type parameter T cannot be instantiated directly
    }
}
```

This limitation is reasonable since we have no way to guarantee that `T` will implement any particular constructor.

2) Another limitation for a non-reifiable type includes using `instanceof` operator.
```java
class Box<T> {
    ...
    public boolean isIntegerSuperType() {
        return Integer.valueOf(0) instanceof T; // compile-time error: Illegal generic type for instanceof
    }
}
```
This operation is prohibited since the run-time bytecode contains no information on non-reifiable types, making it impossible to verify whether an object is an instance of such a type.

3) Only reifiable types can extend `java.lang.Throwable`.

Suppose that there is a generic class that extends `Throwable`.
```java
class MyException<T> extends Exception {}
```

Given this code, the compiler raises the message `Generic class may not extend java.lang.Throwable`. To illustrate the problem, suppose that the compiler ignored this error and ran the following code:
```java
try {
    ...
} catch (MyException<String> e) {
    System.out.println("String");
} catch (MyException<Long> e) {
    System.out.println("Long");
}
```

After type erasure, both caught types would be translated into a single parameterless `MyException` type. As a result, we have a dilemma on how to handle `MyException` – the program would not know which exception message to print. For this reason, any generic extensions of `Throwable` are prohibited.

4) Creating an instance of an array requires a reifiable type. This limitation also relates to `Varargs`, which translates parameters into an array.

Let's look at the signature of the `<T> T[] toArray(T[] a)` method in the `Collection` class. The main task of an array passed as an argument is to provide type information at runtime.

Remember that due to type erasure, the code
```java
Collection<Integer> col = new ArrayList<Integer>();
Integer[] array = col.toArray(new Integer[0]);
```

is equivalent to:
```java
Collection col = new ArrayList();

// col has no type parameter information at runtime. 
// Which array type should we create inside toArray() method without a parameter?
Integer[] array = (Integer[]) col.toArray();
```

Since type erasure handles the type casting, it's perfectly fine to call this method in the following way:
```java
Collection<Integer> col = ... initializing of this Collection

// toArray will create array of appropriate size 
Integer[] array = col.toArray(new Integer[0]);
```

In this manner, using a reifiable type such as Integer preserves type information at runtime.

5) Casting to non-reifiable types usually results in a warning notifying the programmer that this practice may lead to exceptions.

## 4. Conclusion

Recognizing the distinction between non-reifiable and reifiable types can help you avoid errors when implementing generics and wildcards. Non-reifiable types have limitations that prohibit certain operations involving creating instances and arrays, using the `instanceof` operator, and creating parameterized successors. In addition, casting to non-reifiable types may result in a loss of type safety.
