# Computer programming
* Simply put, computer programming is a way to make computers do different tasks. It is a process of writing a set of instructions (also known as **code**) that a machine can understand and making it follow them.
* The end goal might be to solve a mathematical equation, automate a boring task or create a web page, a piece of software, a mobile app or a whole game.
* Computer programming requires technical skills and creative thinking. Some call it science, some call it art.

## 1. What are programming languages?
* Computers don’t understand any language except their native one and need very simple and clear descriptions of every action we want them to do.
* Computers don’t understand English or French, but they do understand programming languages such as C, Python or Java (it’s a bit of a simplification because computers don’t actually understand it, they understand only machine code and programmers use compilers to translate source code that they write to the machine code.
* There are more than a 1000 computer languages. The old ones keep evolving and the new ones keep appearing. Below are the most popular programming languages in 2020 according to  [PYPL PopularitY of Programming Language](http://pypl.github.io/PYPL.html) .
~| **Rank** |  **Language** | **Share** | **Trend** |~
~| 1		      | Python		     |	30.09%    | +3.9%	      |~
~| 2		      | Java		     |	18.84%    | -1.7%	      |~
~| 3		      | Javascript	     |	8.1%    	  | -0.1%	      |~
~| 4		      | C#			     |  7.27%   	  | -0.0%	      |~
~| 5		      | PHP			     |	6.08%.      | -1.1%	      |~
~| 6		      | C/C++		     |	5.86%       | -0.2%	      |~
~| 7		      | R			     |	3.73%       | -0.2%	      |~
~| 8		      | Objective-C	     |	2.42%       |  -0.5%	      |~
~| 9		      | Swift		     |	2.28%       | -0.1%	      |~
~| 10	      | Matlab		     |	1.89%       |  -0.1%	      |~
~| 11	      | Typescript	     |	1.81%       | +0.2%	      |~
~| 12	      | Kotlin		     |	1.64%       | +0.5%	      |~
~| 13	      | VBA			     |	1.29%       | -0.1%	      |~

* Every computer language has its own goals and merits, and some languages are better suited for specific applications and tasks.
* Some languages are more difficult, others - less. Some are simpler and popular, others are nuanced and niche´.

## 2. How to choose a computer language?
* Every field comes with a set number of languages. Web development, for example, differentiates between two main types of programming: front-end and back-end.
* Front-end of a website is the part that users can see. Fonts, colors, sliders, panels, menus are created with a combination of HTML,CSS, and JavaScript.
* Back-end development includes a server, an application, and a database. The back-end developer’s work consists of building and maintaining these components. A lot of different languages can be used here, e.g. PHP, Python, Java, etc.
* So, it’s not really about choosing a language. It’s more about choosing a field. If we want to create Android apps - choose Java, iOS apps - choose Swift, want to develop games - learn C, etc.

## 3. What should I expect ?
* A lot of it feels like a routine, and when it doesn’t, it’s more like hitting the head against the brick wall in the middle of a desert. 
* Programming isn’t just about languages and syntax and compilers, it’s the whole logical thought process that makes it so rewarding. There is never the “best” solution to the problem. We always want to make it faster, better, bigger.
* Programming teaches us to think differently. It teaches us to think about how things work, and why do they work this way. The coding process feels like a puzzle that you’re constantly trying to solve.
* Programming teaches us patience. It’s one of the most stressful and aggravating thing one can ever do. Programmers with years of experience still have moments when their code doesn’t work and they have no idea why. But patience and perseverance are the key traits that got them where they are.
* Bottom line is, programming is a skill. And like every skill, we need to put in some time and effort to see the results. It probably won’t be easy, but it’s definitely worth trying.
