# Thread Management

We've already learned how to start a new thread by simply invoking the `start` method on a corresponding object. However, sometimes it is necessary to manage the lifecycle of a thread while it's working rather than just start it and leave it be.

In this topic we will consider two commonly used methods in multithreading programming: `sleep()` and `join()`. Both methods may throw a checked `InterruptedException` that is omitted here for brevity.

## 1. Sleeping

The static method `Thread.sleep()` causes the currently executing thread to suspend execution for the specified number of milliseconds. This is an efficient means of making processor time available for the other threads of an application or other applications that might be running on a computer.

```java
System.out.println("Started");

Thread.sleep(2000L); // suspend current thread for 2000 millis
         
System.out.println("Finished");
```

Let's see what this code does. At first, it prints **"Started"**. Then the current thread is suspended for 2000 milliseconds (it may be longer, but not less than indicated). Eventually, the thread wakes up and prints **"Finished"**.

Another way to make the current thread sleep is to use the special class `TimeUnit` from the package `java.util.concurrent`:

- `TimeUnit.MILLISECONDS.sleep(2000)` performs `Thread.sleep` for 2000 milliseconds;
- `TimeUnit.SECONDS.sleep(2)` performs `Thread.sleep` for 2 seconds;

There are more existing periods: `NANOSECONDS`, `MICROSECONDS`, `MILLISECONDS`, `SECONDS`, `MINUTES`, `HOURS`, `DAYS`.

## 2. Joining

The `join` method forces the current thread to wait for the completion of another thread on which the method was called. In the following example, the string **"Do something else"** will not be printed until the thread terminates.

```java
Thread thread = ...
thread.start(); // start thread

System.out.println("Do something useful");

thread.join();  // waiting for thread to die

System.out.println("Do something else");
```

The overloaded version of this method takes a waiting time in milliseconds:
```java
thread.join(2000L);
```

This is used to avoid waiting for too long or even infinitely in case the thread is hung.

Let's consider another example. The `Worker` class is developed to solve "a difficult task" simulated by the sleep:

```java
class Worker extends Thread {
    
    @Override
    public void run() {
        try {
            System.out.println("Starting a task");
            Thread.sleep(2000L); // it solves a difficult task
            System.out.println("The task is finished");
        } catch (Exception ignored) {
        }
    }
}
```

Here is the `main` method where the **main** thread waits for completion of the `worker`.
```java
public class JoiningExample {
    public static void main(String[] args) throws InterruptedException {
        Thread worker = new Worker();
        worker.start(); // start the worker
       
        Thread.sleep(100L);
        System.out.println("Do something useful");
        
        worker.join(3000L);  // waiting for the worker
        System.out.println("The program stopped");
    }
}
```

The main thread waits for `worker` and cannot print the message `The program stopped` until the worker terminates or the timeout is exceeded. We know exactly only that `Starting a task` precedes `The task is finished` and `Do something useful` precedes `The program stopped`. There are several possible outputs

First possible output (the task is completed before the timeout is exceeded):
```
Starting a task
Do something useful
The task is finished
The program stopped
```
Second possible output (the task is completed before the timeout is exceeded):
```
Do something useful
Starting a task
The task is finished
The program stopped
```
Third possible output:
```
Do something useful
Starting a task
The program stopped
The task is finished
```
Fourth possible output:
```
Starting a task
Do something useful
The program stopped
The task is finished
```
