# Patterns and Matcher

The Java Class Library has two special classes possessing advanced features for work with regular expressions: `java.util.regex.Pattern` and `java.util.regex.Matcher`. A `Matcher` object provides us with many useful methods to handle regexes, while a `Pattern` object represents a regular expression itself.

## 1. Matching a regex

Suppose we have a text stored in a string variable:

```java
String text = "We use Java to write modern applications";
```

We want to use a regular expression to check whether the text contains substrings **"Java"** or **"java"**. We can carry this out in three simple steps by means of `Pattern` and `Matcher` classes.

1. Create an object of the `Pattern` class by passing a regex string to the `compile` method:
```java
Pattern pattern = Pattern.compile(".*[Jj]ava.*"); // regex to match "java" or "Java" in a text
```
2. Create a `Matcher` by invoking the `matcher` method of the `Pattern` and creating an object for the given string:
```java
Matcher matcher = pattern.matcher(text); // it will match the passed text
```
3. Invoke the `matches` method of the matcher to match the string:
```java
boolean matches = matcher.matches(); // true
```
The method `matches` of a `Matcher` works exactly the same way as the method `matches` of the `String`, with which we are already familiar.

## 2. Advantages of Pattern and Matcher classes

For the moment it may seem that there's no point in `Pattern` and `Matcher` since we already have simple string regex representation. However, there are two main reasons to pay attention to these classes:

- **Performance**. Actually, the `matches` method of the `String` internally invokes the `matches` method of the `Matcher`, but it also invokes `Pattern.compile(...)` every time it is executed. That's not efficient. If the same pattern is used multiple times, compiling it once will be more reasonable.
- **Rich API**. The `Matcher` class has more to offer than a single `matches` method: there are a lot of useful methods to process strings and a `Pattern` provides us with the opportunity to configure it in detail, for example, enable case-insensitive matching.

So, if you plan on reusing your regex several times and/or need more elaborate methods for text and pattern comparison, it is more preferable to use `Pattern` and `Matcher` rather than `String`.

## 3. Patterns and Modes

As you know, a `Pattern` is used to create an object of `Matcher`. If we aren't going to reuse our regex, though, we can simply invoke the `matches` method of the `Pattern` class in a single line.

```java
Pattern.matches(".*[Jj]ava.*", "We use Java to write modern applications"); // true
```

It is similar to invoking the `matches` method of a `String` but has the same performance problem.

Consider the previous example again. It cannot match words like **"JAVA"** because it does not ignore the case, as all regular expressions do by default. Fortunately, there is a special mode `Pattern.CASE_INSENSITIVE` that can be set during the compilation of the `Pattern`. It allows your regex to match strings without taking the case into account.
```java
Pattern pattern = Pattern.compile(".*java.*", Pattern.CASE_INSENSITIVE);

String text = "We use Java to write modern applications";

Matcher matcher = pattern.matcher(text);

System.out.println(matcher.matches()); // true
```

Another mode you may want to remember is `Pattern.DOTALL` that makes the dot metacharacter `.` match all characters, including the line break `\n`.

> Case-insensitive mode is available even without the `Matcher`. You just need to add `(?i)` at the beginning of your regex. To make the dot character match the newline character, add `(?s)`. You can enable both modes by writing `(?is)`.

Take a look at how this works:

```java
Pattern.matches("(?is).*java.*", "\n\nJAVA\n\n"); // true
```

There are also other modes, but we will not consider them here. See [documentation](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/10/docs/api/java/util/regex/Pattern.html) for details.

## 4. The matches and find methods

An instance of `Matcher` provides us with curious methods for pattern/string matching. In this lesson, we will consider only one of them.

Just as the `matches` method of the `String`, `method` matches of the `Matcher` returns `true` only when the pattern matches the whole string, otherwise, it returns `false`. That's not very convenient in some situations, right? For example, if we want to check whether there is a particular substring somewhere in our text, we have to add `.*` at the beginning and at the end of the pattern.

Thanks to the `Matcher` , we can also apply the `find` method. It is similar to the `matches` , but instead of checking the match with the whole string, it tries to find a substring that matches the pattern. Look at the following example to understand the difference between these methods:

```java
String text = "Regex is a powerful tool for programmers";

Pattern pattern = Pattern.compile("tool");
Matcher matcher = pattern.matcher(text);

System.out.println(matcher.matches()); // false, the whole string does not match the pattern
System.out.println(matcher.find()); // true, there is a substring that matches the pattern
```

Remember the boundary characters we've learned before? They can be applied to modify the behavior of the `find` method to make it work somewhat similar to the `matches` method. To make sure that the `find` method will match a substring located at the beginning of the string, we can add the hat character ^ at the start of the regex. To make it match a substring at the end of the string, we can add the dollar character `$` at the end of the regex. By combining these symbols, we make out of `find` a copy of `matches`:

```java
Pattern pattern = Pattern.compile("^tool$");
Matcher matcher = pattern.matcher(text);

System.out.println(matcher.matches()); // false
System.out.println(matcher.find());   // false 
```

By default, both methods `matches` and `find` work with the whole string. It is possible, though, to narrow down their scope by invoking the `region` method that allows us to specify the first (inclusive) and the last (exclusive) indices of the substring that we want our methods to consider.

```java
String text = "Regex is a powerful tool for programmers";
Matcher matcher = Pattern.compile("tool").matcher(text);

matcher.region(10, 20); // start index = 10, end index = 20
System.out.println(matcher.find()); // false
matcher.region(20, 30); // start index = 20, end index = 30
System.out.println(matcher.find()); // true
```

## 5. Conclusion

There are two ways to process regexes: by calling the method of the `String`, and by using `Pattern` and `Matcher` classes. The second way is more efficient, and it also provides a set of useful methods and configurations for string processing. There are two main methods, `matches` and `find` , with a key difference. The `matches` method matches the whole string, while the `find` method looks for a substring matching the regex.
