# Runtime type checking

## 1. Runtime type checking

A variable of a base class can always refer to an object of a subclass. We can determine the actual type of the referred object at runtime.

Java provides several ways to do it:

- the `instanceof` operator that can be used for testing if an object is of a specified type;
- **java reflection** that can be used to obtain an object representing the class.

Let's consider these ways to check types of objects at runtime.

Here is a class hierarchy which we will use in examples:

```java
class Shape {...}

class Circle extends Shape {...}

class Rectangle extends Shape {...}
```

The hierarchy is very simple, the fields and methods of classes are hidden for clarity. However, this hierarchy demonstrates the **"IS-A"** relation pretty well.

## 2. The keyword instanceOf

The binary operator `instanceof` returns `true` if an object is an instance of a particular class or its subclass.

The base syntax is the following:

```
obj instanceof Class
```

We've created a couple of instances of the classes above:
```java
Shape circle = new Circle();  // the reference is Shape, the object is Circle
Shape rect = new Rectangle(); // the reference is Shape, the object is Rectangle
```
Let's determine their types:
```java
boolean circleIsCircle = circle instanceof Circle; // true
boolean circleIsRectangle = circle instanceof Rectangle; // false
boolean circleIsShape = circle instanceof Shape; // true

boolean rectIsRectangle = rect instanceof Rectangle; // true
boolean rectIsCircle = rect instanceof Circle; // false
boolean rectIsShape = rect instanceof Shape; // true
```
So, the `instanceof` operator allows you to determine the actual type of an object even if it is referred to by its superclass.

As you can see, this operator considers a subclass object an instance of the superclass:
```java
boolean circleIsShape = circle instanceof Shape; // true
```

**Pay attention**, the type of the object in question should be a subtype (or the type) of the specified class. Otherwise, the statement cannot be compiled.

Here is a non-compiled example:
```java
Circle c = new Circle();
boolean circleIsRect = c instanceof Rectangle; // Inconvertible types
```

The second line contains the compile-time error: **Inconvertible types**.

## 3. Pattern matching for instanceof

Since Java 14 we've had language enhancement for the `instanceof` operator as a preview feature, which was then finalized and officially released in Java 16. Before the release of this feature, it could only operate with a type — now it is also able to operate with a type pattern. This provides us with a more precise syntax for type checking, followed by casting and performing certain operations. To figure out how it's useful to us, let's first look at the code without a pattern matching:

```java
public class PatternMatchingDemo {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Object obj = " ";

        if (obj instanceof String) {
            String str = (String) obj;

            if (str.isBlank()) {
                System.out.println("The variable is empty or contains only a whitespace");
            }
        }
    }
}
```

Here we have a very simple application. If the `obj` variable is an instance of the `String` class, we cast it to `String` and perform a certain operation. Now take a look at the code where the new pattern is used:

```java
public class PatternMatchingDemo {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Object obj = "";

        if (obj instanceof String str) {
            if (str.isBlank()) {
                System.out.println("The variable is empty or contains only a whitespace");
            }
        }
    }
}
```

If the statement is true, `obj` will be automatically cast to `String` and its value will be assigned to the `str` variable. In addition, we can combine this code with the logical `&&` operator:
```java
public class PatternMatchingDemo {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Object obj = " ";

        if (obj instanceof String str && str.length() > 0) {
            if (str.isBlank()) {
                System.out.println("The variable contains only a whitespace");
            }
        }
    }
}
```

The code to the right of the logical operator is executed only if the type checking returns true and the `obj` value is assigned to the `str` pattern variable. That's why the same code using the `||` logical operator does not compile since it does not require the type checking to return `true`.

## 4. Use reflection

Each object has a method `getClass` that can be used to obtain an object representing the class. We can directly compare the classes represented by objects at runtime using **java reflection**.

Let's consider an example. Here is an instance of `Circle`:

```java
Shape circle = new Circle();
```

Let's test it using reflection:
```java
boolean equalsCircle = circle.getClass() == Circle.class; // true
boolean equalsShape = circle.getClass() == Shape.class;   // false
boolean rectangle = circle.getClass() == Rectangle.class; // false
```

Unlike the `instanceof` operator, this approach performs strict type testing and does not see subclass objects as instances of the superclass.

There is also another way to check types. An object representing the class has a method `isInstance` that is similar to the `instanceof` keyword.

Let's test the object `circle` again.

```java
boolean isInstanceOfCircle = Circle.class.isInstance(circle); // true
boolean isInstanceOfShape = Shape.class.isInstance(circle); // true
boolean isInstanceOfRectangle = Rectangle.class.isInstance(circle); // false 
```

Similar to the `instanceof` operator, this method considers a subclass object as an instance of its superclass. However, unlike the operator, the following example is successfully compiled:
```java
Circle c = new Circle();
boolean circleIsRect = Rectangle.class.isInstance(c); // false
```

You can use any of the described approaches to determine the actual type of the referred object.

## 5. When to use it

If you cast a superclass object to its subclass, you may get a `ClassCastException` if the object has another type. Before casting, you can check the actual type using one of the approaches we've considered in this topic.

The following example demonstrates it.
```java
Shape shape = new Circle();

if (shape.getClass() == Circle.class) {
    Circle circle = (Circle) shape;

    // now we can process it as a circle
}
```

> Keep in mind, a lot of runtime checks in the program may indicate a poor design. Use runtime **polymorphism** to reduce them.       
