# Basic CREATE Statement

SQL is a language that works with data organized in tables and databases. Yes, you know this already. What you probably don't know yet, is how to create and delete databases and tables. In this topic, we'll teach you that. Let's get creative!

## 1. CREATE statement

Let's store information about university students in a new database. We can use the `CREATE DATABASE` statement for this. Our database will be named `students`:
```sql
CREATE DATABASE students;
```

This simple SQL query will create the database. In addition to that, we will need a few tables to organize the data.

## 2. Creating a new table

To create a table, use the `CREATE TABLE` statement.

Let's keep working with our `students` database and create a table `students_info` that will contain four columns: `student_id`, `name`, `surname` and `age`.

The column `student_id` will hold the unique student identifier of the `INT` type. The columns `name` and `surname` will have `VARCHAR(30)` data. The age column will hold `INT` values.
```sql
CREATE TABLE students_info ( 
    student_id INT, 
    name VARCHAR(30), 
    surname VARCHAR(30), 
    age INT
);
```

As a result, we have an empty table `students_info`:
| student_id | 	name | 	surname | 	age |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |


The query above illustrates the main idea of `CREATE` statement implementation. The table created this way will be very simple. Soon you will learn how to make more complex tables.

## 3. Drop a database

Now you know how to create a database or a table, so let's find out how to delete them. To delete a database, you can use the `DROP DATABASE` statement.

The following SQL query drops the existing database `students`:
```sql
DROP DATABASE students; 
```

Keep in mind that if you drop the database, you will lose all the tables stored in it.

## 4. Drop a table

As we've mentioned above, `DROP DATABASE` will delete all the tables in the database and the database itself. If you want to delete only a specific table, use the `DROP TABLE` statement.

Let's delete our `students_info` table with a simple SQL query:

```sql
DROP TABLE students_info; 
```

While the `DROP DATABASE` statement deletes all the tables inside the database, `DROP TABLE` statement deletes the table itself and all information stored in it.

## 5. Conclusion

To create a new database, you can use this query template:
```sql
CREATE DATABASE database_name;
```
The following template is used to drop the database:
```sql
DROP DATABASE database_name; 
```
To create a new table, follow this general template:
```sql
CREATE TABLE table_name ( 
    column_1 column_1_type,
    column_2 column_2_type,
    ...., 
    column_n column_n_type
);
```
To delete a table, use this statement:
```sql
DROP TABLE table_name; 
```
Now you know how to create and delete databases and tables.
