# Object Interning

A large program creates a lot of objects in the memory which may affect the program performance. To reduce the required size of memory, Java can store objects in special pools where the same object can be accessed by different references. This technique works only for several widely-used classes and is known as **object interning**. First, let's try to comprehend this concept with the example of strings.

## 1. Reuse of strings

The `String` class is one of the most popular types, and it is a costly one when it comes to memory space. To optimize strings storage in the heap, Java uses a string pool that shares the same objects with the same value.

As you know, it is possible to create a string using `new` operator as well as providing a value in double quotes. First, let's create two strings using the first approach:
```java
String greeting1 = new String("hello");
String greeting2 = new String("hello");
```

Since `String` is a reference type, the code above creates two objects `"hello"`, and every variable refers to its own object. Therefore the result of comparing these references is `false`, and, of course, the result of comparing the actual values is `true`.
```java
System.out.println(greeting1 == greeting2); // false
System.out.println(greeting1.equals(greeting2)); // true
```

This is quite expected for any reference types, not just strings.

Now we will create two more variables without using the `new` keyword.
```java
String greeting3 = "hello";
String greeting4 = "hello";
```

This may surprise you, but actually, both variables refer to the same `"hello"`, which is stored in a special pool for further reuse. This is what reduces the number of objects in memory. The following code demonstrates that both variables have the same reference:
```java
System.out.println(greeting3 == greeting4); // true
System.out.println(greeting3.equals(greeting4)); // true
```

Despite the fact that `String` is a reference type, the `==` operator returns `true`, because Java uses the same object from the pool. However, it is still required to compare strings using equals, your program should not depend on whether the object is in the pool or not.

There is a method `intern` that helps to get an object from the pool. If the pool has the object, the method just returns it. If the pool doesn't contain the object, the method creates it and returns a reference.
```java
String str1 = new String("hello");
String str2 = "hello";
System.out.println(str1 == str2); // false

String interned = str1.intern(); // returns an existent object from the pool
System.out.println(str1 == interned); // false
System.out.println(str2 == interned); // true // both references are pointed at the same object in the pool

System.out.println(str2 == str2.intern()); // both references are pointed at the same object in the pool
```

## 2. Reuse of wrapper class objects

Like strings, some wrapper classes also use object interning mechanism for reducing the required memory space, but it works a little bit differently.

- The `Boolean` class caches both possible constants.
- The `Character` class caches instances with values from `0` to `127` (`\u0000` to `\u007f`).
- The `Byte`, `Short`, `Integer`, and `Long` cache instances of value `-128` to `127`.
- No cached instances exist for the `Float` and `Double` wrapper classes.

Thus, some wrapper classes store certain ranges of values in special pools to reuse them when creating objects via **boxing** or **autoboxing**.

As an example, `System.out.println(i1 == i2);` prints true when `i1` and `i2` have the same integer value between `-128` and `127` and will print false if i1 and i2 are outside of the -128 to 127 range even though both are the same.
```java
Long i1 = Long.valueOf("127");     // boxing
Long i2 = Long.valueOf("127");     // boxing
System.out.println(i1 == i2);      // true, Java reuses 127
System.out.println(i1.equals(i2)); // true, they have the same value inside
```

It also works with autoboxing:
```java
Long i1 = 127L; // autoboxing
Long i2 = 127L; // autoboxing
System.out.println(i1 == i2);      // true
System.out.println(i1.equals(i2)); // true
```
However, it won't work if the objects are created explicitly using new.
```java
Long i1 = new Long("127");
Long i2 = new Long("127");
System.out.println(i1 == i2);      // false, "new" creates different objects
System.out.println(i1.equals(i2)); // true, they have the same value inside
```

## 3. Conclusion

**Object interning** is an internal feature that allows you to occupy less memory by sharing an object in pools. It works only for immutable objects. Actually, the object interning is a very specific feature for a concrete JVM (we consider **HotSpot** as the primary reference Java VM implementation). Your programs should not depend on this optimization; do not use `==` to compare reference types even if it works correctly for pooled objects.
