# PRIMARY KEY Constraint

Sometimes we need to be sure that all the rows in our table are unique. For example, we want to store information about the conference participants: their name, email, date of birth, and city; we want to make sure that no one is registered twice. In this case, we should find a combination of data that is unique for each participant. Maybe some people will have the same name, but they surely won't share the same personal email, so we can use this field as a unique key to prevent creating duplicates. This unique key is commonly called a **primary key**.

## 1. PRIMARY KEY Constraint

The **PRIMARY KEY** constraint specifies a set of columns with values that can help identify any table record.

This constraint can be specified in the process of creating a table. Let's create a table named *chefs* with columns *chef\_id* INT, *first\_name* VARCHAR(20) and *last\_name* VARCHAR(20). We assume that all chefs have individual identifiers, so we will make our *chef\_id* column the primary key:
```sql
CREATE TABLE chefs (
    chef_id INT PRIMARY KEY, 
    first_name VARCHAR(20), 
    last_name VARCHAR(20)
);
```

Since the primary key has to identify each table row, it must be unique and can not be null.

Another important thing is that a table can have one and only one primary key, but it is allowed to include multiple columns in it.

For example, consider the *employees* table with columns *department\_id* INT NOT NULL, *employee\_id* INT NOT NULL, and *name* VARCHAR(50) NOT NULL. We assume that it's possible to have two employees with identical identifiers across different departments, but it is impossible to have several employees with identical id's in a single department. So, we can have tuples (42, 15, 'Ann Brown') and (43, 15, 'Bob Freud') in the table, but we cannot add a tuple (42, 15, 'John Smith') to that table since there already is an Ann Brown.

In this case, we can define a **named PRIMARY KEY constraint on multiple columns** when we create the *employee* table:
```sql
CREATE TABLE employees (
    department_id INT NOT NULL,
    employee_id INT NOT NULL,
    name varchar(50) NOT NULL,
    CONSTRAINT pk_employee PRIMARY KEY (department_id,employee_id)
); 
```

The syntax from the query above can also be used to create a named PRIMARY KEY constraint on one column.

## 2. Add PRIMARY KEY to an existing table

If we already have a table without a primary key, we can add it using the **ALTER TABLE** statement.

Assume that we have a table named *countries* that was created as follows:
```sql
CREATE TABLE countries (
    country_name VARCHAR(40) NOT NULL UNIQUE, 
    population INT CHECK (population > 0), 
    area REAL NOT NULL 
); 
```

We want to make the column *country\_name* our primary key.

To add an unnamed PRIMARY KEY constraint to the column *country_name*, we use the **ALTER TABLE ADD PRIMARY KEY** statement:
```sql
ALTER TABLE countries
ADD PRIMARY KEY (country_name); 
```

The column *country_name* is already unique and cannot contain null values, so it is safe to make it a primary key of the table countries.

> Be careful when adding this constraint to a non-empty table: we will get an error if we already have duplicate or null values in the potential primary key.

We can also add a named PRIMARY KEY constraint to an existing table using the **ALTER TABLE ADD CONSTRAINT** statement. Let's define a PRIMARY KEY constraint on multiple columns for a table *students*. This table has columns *name* VARCHAR(60), *birth_date* DATE, and *department* VARCHAR(40).

The query below will add a primary key *pk_student*. This primary key will have two columns: *name* and *birth_date*:
```sql
ALTER TABLE students
ADD CONSTRAINT pk_student PRIMARY KEY (name,birth_date); 
```

## 3. Drop PRIMARY KEY

Another thing that we need to be able to do is to delete a primary key from a table. Let's delete the primary key *pk_student* from the table *students*.

To drop the PRIMARY KEY, use **ALTER TABLE DROP PRIMARY KEY**:
```sql
ALTER TABLE students
DROP PRIMARY KEY;
```
Since a table can have only one primary key, we don't have to specify the constraint name.

## 4. Conclusion

Now you know what to do if you need unique rows in a table, how to define a primary key in SQL, add a primary key to the existing table and, if necessary, delete it.
