# Consistency Constraints

Each column in the table has a specific data type, so it's impossible to insert text into a column with the INT type or a decimal number into a column with the BOOLEAN type data. Data type restrictions help us avoid a lot of mistakes, but sometimes these restrictions can be very specific. For example, all personal ID numbers should be unique, or customers have to be adults. These specific restrictions on the values in columns are called **constraints**.

## 1. Example

The most common constraints are **NOT NULL**, **UNIQUE**, **CHECK**, **DEFAULT**, **PRIMARY KEY**, and **FOREIGN KEY**. In this topic, we will talk about the first four constraints from the list.

Let's take a simple life situation as an example. Assume that we've created a table *employees* with columns *personal_id*, *first_name*, *last_name*, and *age* with this simple SQL query:
```sql
CREATE TABLE employees (
    personal_id INT,
    first_name VARCHAR(30),
    last_name VARCHAR(30),
    age INT
);
```

Let's modify this simple table and add some constraints to it.

> In this topic, we follow MySQL syntax. Please note, that in other SQL dialects the queries may be slightly different.

## 2. NOT NULL constraint

The **NOT NULL** constraint will not allow adding a **null** value to a column. In our table *employees*, we can make the *age* column a not null one.

To add the `NOT NULL` constraint, use `ALTER TABLE MODIFY` statement:
```sql
ALTER TABLE employees
MODIFY age INT NOT NULL;
```

With this SQL query, it won't be possible to add a new employee to the table without stating their age. If we already have `NULL` values in the *age* column, we will get an error.

To remove this constraint, just use `ALTER TABLE MODIFY` again without the `NOT NULL` attribute:
```sql
ALTER TABLE employees
MODIFY age INT;
```

You can also use this constraint in the `CREATE TABLE` statement. Just add it to the end of the column type declaration:
```sql
CREATE TABLE employees (
    personal_id INT,
    first_name VARCHAR(30),
    last_name VARCHAR(30),
    age INT NOT NULL
);
```

## 3. UNIQUE constraint

The **UNIQUE** constraint will prohibit adding duplicate values to the column. We know that the employee identifier should be unique, so we can add this constraint to the column *personal_id*.

If you want to add a `UNIQUE` constraint to the column when creating the table, you can specify it after column type declaration:
```sql
CREATE TABLE employees (
    personal_id INT UNIQUE,
    first_name VARCHAR(30),
    last_name VARCHAR(30),
    age INT 
);
```

We can add `UNIQUE` to an existing table with a simple query using **ALTER TABLE ADD UNIQUE** statement:
```sql
ALTER TABLE employees
ADD UNIQUE (personal_id);
```

After the query execution, column *personal_id* becomes unique. If we already have duplicate values in this column, we will get an error, so check your table before adding this constraint.

Sometimes we have to make more than one column unique. In this case, we can define a **named constraint** at the end of the `CREATE TABLE` statement:
```sql
CREATE TABLE employees (
    personal_id INT,
    first_name VARCHAR(30),
    last_name VARCHAR(30),
    age INT, 
    CONSTRAINT uq_id_last_name UNIQUE (personal_id, last_name) 
);
```

To drop a named constraint, you can also use **ALTER TABLE DROP INDEX** statement:
```sql
ALTER TABLE employees
DROP INDEX uq_id_last_name; 
```

## 4. CHECK constraint

The **CHECK** constraint allows us to add a logical expression. For example, we can say that all our employees should be older than sixteen. We can add the `CHECK` constraint in `CREATE TABLE`:
```sql
CREATE TABLE employees (
    personal_id INT,
    first_name VARCHAR(30),
    last_name VARCHAR(30),
    age INT CHECK (age > 16)
);
```

If you want to add this constraint to an existing table, you can use the **ALTER TABLE ADD CHECK** statement. The syntax will be the same as with the `UNIQUE` constraint.

To drop an unnamed `CHECK`, use **ALTER TABLE DROP CHECK**:
```sql
ALTER TABLE employees
DROP CHECK age; 
```

The `CHECK` constraint can be named and assigned to multiple columns. Similar to the `UNIQUE` example above, you may specify a named `CHECK` constraint when creating a table. You can also use the **ALTER TABLE ADD CONSTRAINT** statement and add a named `CHECK` constraint for one or multiple columns to an existing table with the following query:
```sql
ALTER TABLE employees 
ADD CONSTRAINT chk_employee CHECK (age > 16 AND personal_id > 0); 
```

Both the `CHECK` constraint and a named `UNIQUE` constraint may be added using the `ALTER TABLE ADD CONSTRAINT` command.

To delete a named `CHECK` constraint, you can use the `ALTER TABLE DROP CHECK` statement.

## 5. DEFAULT constraint

The **DEFAULT** constraint defines the **initial** value in a column: the value that will appear if you don't insert anything. Let's define some default values in our table:
```sql
CREATE TABLE employees (
    personal_id INT,
    first_name VARCHAR(30) DEFAULT 'John',
    last_name VARCHAR(30) DEFAULT 'Doe',
    age INT DEFAULT 17
);
```

Now even if you add a new row with only personal_id, the columns *first_name*, *last_name*, and *age* will be defined as 'John', 'Doe', and 17 respectively.

To add the `DEFAULT` constraint to an existing table, use the **ALTER TABLE ALTER SET DEFAULT** statement:
```sql
ALTER TABLE employees
ALTER first_name SET DEFAULT 'John';
```
To delete an existing `DEFAULT` constraint, use the **ALTER TABLE ALTER DROP DEFAULT** statement:
```sql
ALTER TABLE employees 
ALTER first_name DROP DEFAULT; 
```

## 6. Combining constraints

Obviously, a column can have more than one constraint. For example, it is useful to combine `NOT NULL` and `DEFAULT` constraints to avoid errors when adding some new information.

If we have chosen constraints we need, then we may apply them when creating a table using the `CREATE` statement. For example, let's re-create our table *employees* using all these useful constraints at the same time:
```sql
CREATE TABLE employees (
    personal_id INT NOT NULL UNIQUE,
    first_name VARCHAR(30) NOT NULL DEFAULT 'John',
    last_name VARCHAR(30) NOT NULL DEFAULT 'Doe',
    age INT DEFAULT 17, 
    CHECK (age > 16) 
);
```

## 7. Conclusion

Now you know both how to create a simple table, and also how to make it more complex and functional using constraints. Let's practice making constraints when creating a table, adding constraints to the existing table, and creating named constraints
