# Interruptions

A thread terminates when its `run` method stops. Sometimes you may have to terminate a task that is being executed, for example when shutting down an application with multiple threads. Java provides a mechanism called **interruptions** for requesting a thread to stop or to do something else. Interruption does not force a thread to react immediately but notifies it about such demand.

## 1. interrupt() and isInterrupted()

Invoking the `interrupt()` method on an instance of the `Thread` class sets its interrupted flag as `true`.
```java
Thread thread = ...
thread.interrupt(); // interrupt this thread
```

The reaction to this event is determined by the interrupted thread itself. One common case for that is to stop the execution. Though a thread may simply ignore it.

Depending on the current state of a thread, interruptions are handled differently. Invoking `thread.interrupt()` will cause `InterruptedException` if the thread is sleeping or joining another thread. Otherwise, the only thing that will happen is that the interrupted flag will be set to `true`.

Here is an example of how a thread may handle an interruption:
```java
public class CustomThread extends Thread {

    @Override
    public void run() {
        while (!isInterrupted()) {
            try {
                doAction();
                Thread.sleep(1000); // it may throw InterruptedException
            } catch (InterruptedException e) {
                System.out.println("sleeping was interrupted");
                break; // stop the loop
            }
        }
        System.out.printf("%s finished", getName());
    }

    private void doAction() {
        // something useful
    }
}
```

When this thread is running, an interruption may occur on any statement inside the run method, including checking the loop's condition, performing `doAction` and during sleep. If the thread is sleeping, `Thread.sleep(1000)` throws an `InterruptedException` that is handled. In other cases, the loop is stopped according to the condition on the next iteration.

If you prefer implementing `Runnable` rather than extending `Thread` directly, you may use the static method `Thread.interrupted()` inside the run method. The main difference between this and the previous method is that the static method resets the interruption status to `false`.

## 2. An example: counting with interruption

As an example, we will consider a task that counts numbers while the thread is not interrupted.
```java
class CountingTask implements Runnable {

    @Override
    public void run() {
        System.out.println("Start counting");
        int i = 1; // the first number to print

        try {
            while (!Thread.interrupted()) {
                System.out.println(i);
                i++;
                Thread.sleep(1000); 
            }
        } catch (InterruptedException e) {
            System.out.println("Sleeping was interrupted");
        }
        System.out.println("Finishing");
    }
}
```

In this implementation, the `sleep` takes almost all the time and interruption will often occur during sleeping. If the program does not print the string **"Sleeping was interrupted"** it means that the thread was interrupted during work, not sleep.

In the `main` method, we create a thread to perform the task and then interrupt the thread.
```java
public class InterruptionDemo {

    public static void main(String[] args) throws InterruptedException {
        Thread counter = new Thread(new CountingTask());
        counter.start();
        Thread.sleep(5000L);
        counter.interrupt();
        counter.join();
    }
}
```

**Note** that in the `main` method, both methods `sleep` and `join` may also throw `InterruptedException` upon being interrupted. Handling this was omitted here only for brevity.

The program output is:
```
Start counting
1
2
3
4
Sleeping was interrupted
Finishing
```


