# Customizing JSON with Gson

While the default settings of the Gson library are often enough for our basic needs, there are situations where more flexibility is required. If the same developer/team is both serializing and deserializing the same Java objects, some of the customizations can be done when writing the class for the object. You just make the object store the data in the same way you want it to be serialized.

However, this can be a bit limiting in certain situations, so you can use the **GsonBuilder** class to modify the default behavior of Gson objects. If you need ultimate control over the fine details of serialization/deserialization, you can create your own classes that implement the `JsonSerializer<T>` and/or `JsonDeserializer<T>` interfaces. 

## 1. GsonBuilder

The Gson library provides a convenient object for configuring the basic behavior of Gson's `JsonObjects`. The `GsonBuilder` class is implemented using the builder design pattern, so you can chain a bunch of its methods together on an object instance to set the desired behavior. You can see it in this example:

```java
GsonBuilder gsonBuilder = new GsonBuilder();
Gson gson = gsonBuilder
    .setPrettyPrinting()
    .serializeNulls()
    .excludeFieldsWithoutExposeAnnotation()
    .create();
```

You can guess what the chainable methods do just from their names. `setPrettyPrinting()` formats the JSON so it is easier to read, `serializeNulls()` overrides the default behavior of non-serializing fields with null values, and `excludeFieldsWithoutExposeAnnotation()` only serializes fields explicitly annotated with `@Expose`. If we use `@Expose` only on some of our object's fields, Gson will serialize those and ignore the rest.

Continuing with the scenario from the introductory topic, let's say I've just founded my own guitar brand, with the above GsonBuilder settings applied and the following `GuitarBrand` class modified with some `@Expose` annotations.
```java
public class GuitarBrand {
    @Expose
    Date dateFounded;
    @Expose
    String name;
    String country;
    @Expose
    List<String> artistsUsedBy;
    
    // getters, setters, contructor
}
```
We can create an object representing the brand and then print the result of serializing it to see what we end up with. We'll pass the current date as the founding date and the `artistsUsedBy` will be set to null since no one has used our brand yet (but just you wait!).
```java
 GuitarBrand ultimateGuitars = new GuitarBrand(new Date(), "Ultimate Guitars",
 "Canada", null);
 String jsonUltimateGuitars = gson.toJson(ultimateGuitars);
 System.out.println(jsonUltimateGuitars);
```

Finally, we have the output!
```json
{
	"dateFounded": "Nov 9, 2021, 4:38:14 PM",
	"brand": "Ultimate Guitars",
	"artistsUsedBy": null
}
```

As you can see, only the fields we annotated with `@Expose` are present, the `artistsUsedBy` field was serialized even though it is currently null, and the whole thing was printed with nice-looking formatting. 

## 2. Custom serialization

If we don't want to use Gson's default settings, we can customize the way it converts our object into JSON. In a nutshell, we create a custom serializer class that implements the `JsonSerializer<T>` interface and overrides its `serialize()` method. We configure it specifically for our class by passing our class in as a type argument.
```java
public class GuitarBrandGsonSerializer implements JsonSerializer<GuitarBrand> {
     
    @Override
    public JsonElement serialize(GuitarBrand guitar, Type type,
        JsonSerializationContext jsonSerializationContext) {
        
        JsonObject guitarJsonObj = new JsonObject();
        
        // Code to customize the JsonObject

        return guitarJsonObj;
    }
}
```

Now, of course, we need to fill in the details for how we want to customize the `JsonObject`. First, we can customize the name of the JSON properties so that they don't just follow the Java class's property names. To do this, we can use the `addProperty()` method. The first parameter is for the chosen name as a `String` , and the second is for the value of the object we are assigning to that name.

Since Gson maintains the insertion order, let's take this opportunity to put the brand name as the first property. We'll also give it a more transparent name: "brand_name." We need to pass the date in as a `String`, so we'll use a `SimpleDateFormat` object to format it for us. We could also include HTML in the property name if it was necessary. If we want to add an array as a value, we can do it using `add()` method.

```java
SimpleDateFormat sdf = new SimpleDateFormat("dd-MM-yyyy");

guitarJsonObj.addProperty("brand_name", guitar.getName());
guitarJsonObj.addProperty("country_founded_in", guitar.getCountry());
guitarJsonObj.addProperty("date_founded", sdf.format(guitar.getDateFounded()));

JsonArray array = new JsonArray();
if (guitar.getArtistsUsedBy() != null) {
    guitar.getArtistsUsedBy().forEach(array::add);
}
guitarJsonObj.add("<strong>Artists Who Use</strong>", array);
```

## 3. Custom deserialization

While the default deserialization is often good enough for most use cases, there may be times when you want the data to be deserialized in a certain way. The following example is a bit long-winded, but it demonstrates that inside the `deserialize` method you have the liberty to do any modifications you want to the JsonObject date before creating and returning the Java object. However, if you define your custom serializer carefully, the default deserializer will often be enough.

```java
public class GuitarBrandGsonDeserializer implements JsonDeserializer<GuitarBrand> {

    private SimpleDateFormat sdf = new SimpleDateFormat("yyyy-MM-dd");

    @Override
    public GuitarBrand deserialize(JsonElement json, Type type,
                                   JsonDeserializationContext jsonDeserializationContext) throws 
                                   JsonParseException {

        JsonObject jsonObject = json.getAsJsonObject();

        JsonElement jsonGuitarBrandName = jsonObject.get("name");
        JsonElement jsonDateFounded = jsonObject.get("dateOfBirth");
        JsonElement jsonCountry = jsonObject.get("country");
        JsonArray jsonArtistsUsedBy = jsonObject.getAsJsonArray("artistsUsedBy");

        ArrayList<String> artistList = new ArrayList<>();
        if (jsonArtistsUsedBy != null) {
            for (int i = 0; i < jsonArtistsUsedBy.size(); i++) {
                artistList.add(jsonArtistsUsedBy.get(i).getAsString());
            }
        }

        GuitarBrand guitarBrand = new GuitarBrand(sdf.parse(jsonDateFounded.getAsString()), 
                                  jsonGuitarBrandName.getAsString(), 
                                  jsonCountry.getAsString(), artistList);
        return guitarBrand;
    }
}
```

> Custom deserialization is especially important when you don't have access to the class files for serialized objects, or when the JSON objects contain more information than you need.

## 4. Tying it all together

Now that we've looked at customizing Gson and using the `GsonBuilder` class, we can finally put the two of them together and show how to implement our custom classes. In order for a `Gson` object to use our customized class, we need to register it using a `GsonBuilder` object. We do this using the `registerTypeAdapter()` method, to which we pass the class we are serializing/deserializing and an instance of our custom class. While we're at it, let's chain the `disableHtmlEscaping()` method too, since our custom serializer included some raw HTML.

```java
Gson gson = new GsonBuilder()
    .registerTypeAdapter(GuitarBrand.class, new GuitarBrandGsonSerializer())
    .disableHtmlEscaping()
    .create();
```

The exact same process is used for registering a deserializer. Once this is done, the `Gson` object can be used in the same way as when we used the default `Gson` object, only now it will have the custom behavior applied. 

## 5. Conclusion

In this topic, we looked at ways of customizing the behavior of Gson to suit your needs. The GsonBuilder class can be used to make minor changes to the default behavior of Gson objects, such as setting better-looking printing, serializing nulls, escaping HTML, and only serializing fields with `@Expose` annotations. When absolute control over serialization and deserialization is required, we can create custom classes, define their behavior, and register them with GsonBuilder's `registerTypeAdapter()` method.
