# Literals

In almost any program or data analysis script, you need to operate constant values called **literals**. For example, if you're analyzing census data and need to extract census rows according to specific criteria, you often have to use literals.

In this topic, we'll discuss three basic types of literals: numeric, string, and boolean. To apply this newly acquired knowledge right away, we'll write a "Hello world!" program.

## 1. String literals

A string constant in SQL is a sequence of characters surrounded by single (') or double (") quotes, for example, 'Hyperskill', 'Hello world!', and "SQL (Structured Query Language)".

To include a single-quote character within a string literal wrapped in single quotes, type two adjacent single quotes, for example, 'Jessie''s birthday'. Alternatively, wrap the literal in double quotes so that single quote will be treated as a regular symbol. For example, "Sophie's choice".

## 2. Numeric literals

Numeric literals can be either positive or negative numbers specified as **integer** (for example, 1, +9000, -256), **decimal** (for example, 2.3, +876.234, -1024.0), or real values in **exponential** notation (for example, 0.4e3, +7.192834e+10, -4.0e-5). If you do not specify the sign, then a positive number is assumed by default.

Numeric literals may be `INTEGER`, `REAL`, or `DECIMAL`. The data management system automatically defines a literal's type based on the context. For example, if you specify a numeric value without a decimal point, which fits the INTEGER range of values, the system will treat it as `INTEGER`, and otherwise as `DECIMAL`. Numeric values specified in exponential notation are treated as `REAL` data.

You can directly specify the type of a literal using the `CAST(value AS type)` function. Instead of the placeholders value and type, you can use your literal and type.
```sql
SELECT
    CAST(1 AS DECIMAL(20,3));
```
In the example above, the numeric value `1` is interpreted as `DECIMAL (20,3)` and `1.000` as result of query.

## 3. Boolean literals

Boolean literals are boolean logic truth values: `TRUE` and `FALSE`. No matter how you specify the value (`TRUE` or `true`), these values are identical boolean literals. Same applies to the `FALSE` values.

## 4. Hello, World

Now, we are ready to write a traditional "Hello, World!" program. This SQL code (actually, a single query) implements it:
```sql
SELECT 'Hello, World!';
```

The query evaluation result is the following. Its actual representation may be different depending on the environment you run it in:
```
Hello, World!
```
Actually, the query declaratively states that we want to select this string as a result. The statement consists of three parts: the keyword `SELECT` (case insensitive), the literal that we want to receive, and a semicolon that defines the end of the query.

Summarizing, a simple SQL query that extracts any literal, whether it's a string, numeric, or boolean, looks as follows. You may replace `literal` with any correctly specified constant you want:
```sql
SELECT literal;
```

## 5. Conclusion

In this topic, you learned about constant values in SQL, or, in other words, literals. Numeric literals can be specified as positive or negative numbers. Also, they can be specified as integers, decimals, or real values in exponential notation. String literals are characters surrounded by single or double quotes. Boolean literals are boolean logic truth values: `TRUE` and `FALSE`.

Having studied this topic, you now know how to define numeric, string, and boolean constant values and say "Hello, Data!" – and even more – in SQL. Let's move on to practice.
