# Logback

As you already know, the Java ecosystem provides many tools for logging. In this topic, we are going to learn more about a popular Java logging library named **Logback**. It is the successor of the **Log4j** logging library and is based on similar concepts. Logback is fast in both synchronous and asynchronous logging and offers many useful features that makes it a good choice for a project of any scale.

The most important difference between using a Logback logger and simply printing a message to `System.out` is that each logger has context. The logger context allows enabling or disabling certain log messages and is responsible for creating logger instances and arranging their hierarchy. Let's take a closer look at all these features.

## 1. Adding Logback to a project

Installing Logback is very easy – simply add the dependencies to Maven or Gradle.

To get started with Logback, you will need to add the `logback-classic` dependency.

If you are using Maven, open the *pom.xml* file and add these lines:
```
<dependencies>
    <dependency>
        <groupId>ch.qos.logback</groupId>
        <artifactId>logback-classic</artifactId>
        <version>1.2.3</version>
    </dependency>
</dependencies>
```

If you use Gradle as your build tool, then add this line to your *build.gradle* file:
```
dependencies {
    implementation 'ch.qos.logback:logback-classic:1.2.11'
}
```

This library will transitively pull two other dependencies, `slf4j-api` and `logback-core`.

**SLF4J** (Simple Logging Facade for Java) is a facade or abstraction for various logging libraries, including Logback. It provides a simple logging API, and Logback implements it natively. You can invoke SLF4J logger with Logback as its underlying implementation without any overhead.

The `logback-core` library lays the foundation for Logback and provides a few ready-made classes for use. They are:

- `ConsoleAppender`, which adds log events to `System.out` or `System.err`;
- `FileAppender`, which adds log events to the file;
- `RollingFileAppender`, which adds log events to the file and can change its logging target to another file when a certain condition is met.

The `logback-classic` library provides classes that make it possible to send data to external systems. They are:

- `SMTPAppender`, which collects data in packets and sends the contents of the packet to a user-defined email after the occurrence of an event specified by the user;
- `DBAppender`, which adds data to database tables.

## 2. Basic logging

Let's create a class and declare a few `Logger` objects.
```java
package com.example;

import org.slf4j.Logger;
import org.slf4j.LoggerFactory;

public class Example {
    private static final Logger LOG_1 = LoggerFactory.getLogger(Example.class);
    private static final Logger LOG_2 = LoggerFactory.getLogger("com.example.Example");

    public static void main(String[] args) {
        LOG_1.info("Information from LOG_1");
        LOG_2.warn("Warning from LOG_2");

        LOG_1.info("Are the loggers the same? {}", LOG_1 == LOG_2);
    }
}
```

As you can see, we don't refer to any Logback class directly. Instead, we invoke SLF4J classes and interfaces, and SLF4J, in turn, delegates logging operations to Logback.

When creating a logger, we use the `getLogger` method of the `LoggerFactory` that accepts either `Class` or `String` as an argument. In both cases, the argument is used as the name of the logger. If a logger with the same name already exists, the method returns the same logger, and if there is no logger with the same name, a new one is created.

A `Logger` object has a number of methods, namely `trace`, `debug`, `info`, `warn`, and `error`, for outputting a message of the corresponding log request level.

If we run the code, we'll get this output:
```
22:23:52.247 [main] INFO com.example.Example - Information from LOG_1
22:23:52.248 [main] WARN com.example.Example - Warning from LOG_2
22:23:52.248 [main] INFO com.example.Example - Are the loggers the same? true
```
By default, each log line has the following elements: timestamp, thread name, log request level, logger name, and log message. We will learn how to change this default configuration in the next section.

## 3. Message parameterization

Logback has the ability to add objects or variables to the logs in the message. You can use it to know what kind of error has occurred and why.

Here is an example:
```java
import org.slf4j.Logger;
import org.slf4j.LoggerFactory;

public class Example {
    private static final Logger LOG = LoggerFactory.getLogger(Example.class);
    
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        LOG.info("My name is {}. {} {}.", "Bond", "James", "Bond");
    }
}
```

By adding the `{}` brackets to logger messages, we can indicate where we want to put our variables.
```
22:43:49.141 [main] INFO com.example.Example - My name is Bond. James Bond.
```
We can also use this Logback function to output an error along with relevant information:
```java
import org.slf4j.Logger;
import org.slf4j.LoggerFactory;

public class Example {
    private static final Logger LOG = LoggerFactory.getLogger(Example.class);

    public static void main(String[] args) {
        int number = 1;
        int divisor = 0;
        
        try {
            int result = number / divisor;
        } catch (ArithmeticException e) {
            LOG.error("Something went wrong with divisor {}", divisor, e);
        }
    }
}
```
Logback can extract the stack trace, and, as a result, below we can see that, due to the fact that we added an exception object to the message, it was displayed in the log. You don't need to add a placeholder to the log message to display an exception object, but, in such cases, it must be the last argument passed to the log request method.
```
22:45:44.113 [main] ERROR com.example.Example - Something went wrong with divisor 0
java.lang.ArithmeticException: / by zero
	at com.example.Example.main(Example.java:11)
```
You can read the [documentation](https://logback.qos.ch/manual/architecture.html) for more details about the nuances of adding variables to a logger message.

## 4. Fine-tuning the logger configuration

To configure loggers in Logback, you can use an *xml* file or a Groovy file. We will configure our logger with an *xml* file. You will need to create a *logback.xml* file and place it in the *resource* folder. This is what the basic settings file will look like:
```
<configuration>
    <appender name="console" class="ch.qos.logback.core.ConsoleAppender">
        <encoder>
            <pattern>%d{HH:mm:ss} %-5level %logger{36} - %msg%n</pattern>
        </encoder>
    </appender>

    <root level="info">
        <appender-ref ref="console" />
    </root>
</configuration>
```
All logger settings are recorded between the `<configuration>` tags.

Next comes the tag `<appender>`. **Appender** is a tool that allows for configuring where and how the logs will be recorded. The `name` parameter specifies the name of the appender, and the `class` parameter specifies the class that will implement the appender.

The `<encoder>` tag specifies the format in which the logs will be recorded. A log message in the format we defined above would look like this:
```
01:15:54 INFO  com.example.Example - Customized message format
```

The `<root>` tag refers to the pre-defined root logger. Here we have specified the log level `level="info"`, and the appender `<appender-ref ref="console" />` was tied to it.

From the top of the settings, you can notice that we used `ConsoleAppender` . This appender makes it possible to output logs in the console.

Another standard appender is `FileAppender` . As you can see by the name, this appender allows you to write logs to a file.
```
<configuration>
    <appender name="file" class="ch.qos.logback.core.FileAppender">
        <file>${user.dir}/logs/example.log</file>
        <encoder>
            <pattern>%d{HH:mm:ss} [%thread] %-5level %logger{36} - %msg%n</pattern>
        </encoder>
    </appender>

    <root level="info">
        <appender-ref ref="file" />
    </root>
</configuration>
```
This is the most primitive setup for `FileAppender`. A new addition to the settings is the `<file>` tag, in which we specify where the file is located and where we want to record logs. Don't worry if this file is not there — it will be created when the application is launched. Thanks to `${user.dir}`, the log file will appear in the main project folder.

## 5. Logger levels

Logback allows you to configure the log level for individual packages and classes. To do this, you will need to go to *logback.xml* file, then specify the parameters `name` and `level` in the camp. In the `name` parameter, specify the path to the package or class in your project, and in the `level` parameter, specify the logging level that you need. Here is an example of how you can configure a logger level:
```java
import org.slf4j.Logger;
import org.slf4j.LoggerFactory;

public class Example {
    private static final Logger LOG = LoggerFactory.getLogger(Example.class);

    public static void main(String[] args) {
        LoggerLevelClass.log();
        LOG.warn("WARN level message");
        LOG.info("INFO level message");
    }
}

class LoggerLevelClass {
    private static final Logger LOG = LoggerFactory.getLogger(LoggerLevelClass.class);

    public static void log() {
        LOG.debug("DEBUG level message");
        LOG.info("INFO level message");
    }
}
```
For the classes above, we set up these logger levels:
```java
<configuration>
<appender name="console" class="ch.qos.logback.core.ConsoleAppender">
    <encoder>
        <pattern>%d{HH:mm:ss.SSS} [%thread] %-5level %logger{36} - %msg%n</pattern>
    </encoder>
</appender>

<logger name="com.example" level="warn"/>
<logger name="com.example.LoggerLevelClass" level="info"/>

<root level="info">
    <appender-ref ref="console" />
</root>
</configuration>
```

Each logger will output only the messages whose log request level is higher than or equal to the level of the logger. There is a hierarchy in Logback that is based on names. That is, if we have a logger named `com.logback.first`, it will be the parent of a logger called `com.logback.first.second`, which is the parent of the `com.logback logger.first.second.third`. This means that you can define logger levels for entire packages. On top of every hierarchy is the root logger. If we run the code, we will see only two log messages:
```
23:34:02.575 INFO  com.example.LoggerLevelClass - INFO level message
23:34:02.576 WARN  com.example.Example - WARN level message
```
If you want to learn more about the hierarchy in Logback, you can read [this article](https://medium.com/@igorski/log-hierarchy-in-logback-f68d731941e9).

## 6. Conclusion

In this topic, you've found out what Logback is for and what functionalities it provides to Java developers. Thanks to Logback, you will know what actions your program performed. You can also configure loggers for your convenience, monitor the package or classes separately, and easily track errors and their causes.
